Table of Contents {#table-of-contents .TOCHeading}
=================

##### Page Break

List of Acronyms
================

  DBH   Diameter at breast height (height = 1.37 m)
  ----- ---------------------------------------------
  GIS   Geographic information system
  GPS   Global positioning system

##### Page Break

Part 1: Field surveys across DoD installations
==============================================

##### Page Break

"burn unit" = "burn block" = A discrete area within a larger prescribed
or fire use project

(<https://www.nwcg.gov/term/glossary/burn-block%C2%A0>)

Installations typically have multiple larger management units or
trainining areas that are made up of smaller burn units. At some
installations the burn units are the same as the training/management
areas. There are training and ecological management needs that are
considered in the management plan of each area, such as land navigation
training for troops and maintaining habitat for species on the federal
threatened and endangered species list (e.g. the red cockaded
woodpecker). The fire management applied to the burn blocks within the
larger areas varies based on the vegetation and the training uses and
management goals.

![Figure 1.](media/image1.png){width="6.5in"
height="3.4954975940507436in"}

Figure 1.

Technical Approach
==================

Experimental design
-------------------

The goal of our experimental design was to assess the potential effects
of fire history (i.e., years since most recent burn) and cogongrass
infestation on tick densities, host availability (i.e., dung pellet
counts), and vegetation type and conditions (i.e., ...) across
installations throughout our study region. The experimental design is
summarized in Figure X. The study region is defined as five states in
the southeastern U.S (i.e., Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, South
Carolina, and Florida). Within the study region, we collected field data
at nine military installations (i.e., Avon Park AFR, Fort Benning, Camp
Blanding, Eglin AFB, Fort Gordon, Fort Jackson, Moody AFB, Camp Shelby,
and Tyndall AFB). Each installation was divided into burn units, with
separate histories of controlled burns (number of burn units ranged from
\# at INSTALLATION to \# at INSTALLATION). At least one plot was
established within each burn unit. If part of a burn unit was infested
with cogongrass, two plots were established (i.e., one in an invaded
area and one in an uninvaded area). These plots were considered the
smallest experimental unit of replication for all data analyses. The
plots across all installations that have been visited to date are
summarized in Table X.

![C:\\Users\\allie\\Downloads\\SERDPstatsTerms.tif](media/image2.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="2.067361111111111in"}

**Figure X. Summary of overall experimental design for field data
collection.**

**Table X. Summary of plots visited across all installations to date.**

  **Installation**   **Number of Plots**   **Years Since Fire**   **Years Visited**             
  ------------------ --------------------- ---------------------- ------------------- --------- ------------
                     **Uninvaded**         **Invaded**            **Total**                     
  Avon Park AFR      8                     4                      12                  0 -- 6    2017, 2018
  Fort Benning       10                    0                      10                  0 -- 4    2018
  Camp Blanding      13                    0                      13                  0 -- 10   2017, 2018
  Eglin AFB          11                    0                      11                  0 -- 11   2017, 2018
  Fort Gordon        8                     0                      8                   0 -- 9    2018
  Fort Jackson       13                    0                      13                  0 -- 11   2018
  Moody AFB          3                     0                      3                   0 -- 11   2017
  Camp Shelby        9                     4                      13                  1 -- 7    2017, 2018
  Tyndall AFB        8                     1                      9                   0 -- 6    2017, 2018
  **Totals**         **83**                **9**                  **92**                        

Due to intensive invasive plant management efforts by installation
managers, many installations lacked congongrass infestations; only Avon
Park AFR, Camp Shelby, and Tyndall AFB had substantial cogongrass
infestations. Thus, to maximize the statistical power of each test, we
developed separate statistical models to analyze (1) the effect of
cogongrass infestation and (2) the effect of fire history on each
response variable; these models guided our selection of burn units in
which to collect data. The first model, designed to test the effect of
cogongrass infestation on the response variables, is a nested split-plot
design that considers the fixed main effects of installation $N_{i}$,
burn unit nested within installation $B_{k\left( i \right)}$ (as the
whole plot), and cogongrass invasion status $C_{l}$ (as the sub-plot),
and the random effect of study year $Y_{j}$ (i.e., 2017 or 2018) on each
response variable (Eqn. 1).

$Y_{\text{ijkl}} = \mu + N_{i} + Y_{j} + B_{k\left( i \right)} + \varepsilon_{\text{ijk}} + C_{l} + \varepsilon_{\text{ijkl}}$
Eqn. 1

The second model, designed to test the effects of years since the most
recent burn on the response variables, is a randomized complete block
design that considers the fixed main effect of installation $N_{i}$,
years since the most recent burn
$\beta\left( x_{\text{ij}} - \overline{x} \right)$ as a covariate, and
the random effect of study year $Y_{j}$ on each response variable (Eqn.
2).

$Y_{\text{ijk}} = \mu + \beta\left( x_{\text{ij}} - \overline{x} \right) + N_{i} + Y_{j} + NY_{\text{ij}} + \varepsilon_{\text{ijk}}$
Eqn. 2

A major consideration in the overall experimental design was whether to
prioritize collecting data at the same plots over multiple years versus
collecting data at a larger number of plots for a single time point. In
general, we prioritized the latter, because (1) this design increases
the power of our statistical tests, which use plot as the experimental
unit, and (2) the short duration of the study (i.e., three planned field
seasons) precluded a repeated-measures analysis of the response
variables over time. However, in the event that a plot that had been
visited in 2017 was burned, we revisited the same plot in 2018 to
conduct a before-and-after comparison of the immediate impacts of the
burn on the response variables. We also revisited in 2018 a subsample of
the plots visited in 2017 to estimate inter-annual variation in the
response variables, particularly tick density and host availability,
throughout the study period.

Field sampling design
---------------------

Following the experimental design, we established plots to achieve a
stratified sampling that covered the range of fire history at each
installation. We obtained fire history and known cogongrass invasions as
GIS layers from each installation and identified potential plot
locations based on time since last fire. Potential locations were sent
to our contacts at the installation to solicit further guidance on
selecting the final set of candidate locations and arranging access. Our
sampling season coincided with the prescribed fire management season at
most installations, so the fire data we had on hand was sometimes out of
date by the time a visit was arranged. In burn blocks with a cogongrass
invasion we established one plot in the invaded area and one plot in an
uninvaded area, with at least 100 meters between the plots. In burn
blocks without an invasion we established one plot in an area
representative of the vegetation conditions in the burn block.

![Figure XX. Burn unit map example](media/image3.png){width="6.5in"
height="4.596521216097988in"}

Figure XX. Burn unit map example

### Plot design

Each plot consisted of a main circular center plot (12.6 m radius,
approximately 500 m^2^), a circular subplot (5.64 m radius,
approximately 100 m^2^), four four 1 m x 1 m qudarats, four 25 cm x 25
cm quadrats, four 50 m transects, and four locations for sampling tick
abundance (Figure 1). In the main circular plot and subplot we measured
trees, saplings, and shrubs. Ground vegetation and litter were measured
in the 1 m and 25 cm quadrats located 10 m from plot center in each of
the cardinal directions. The 50 m transects originated at the plot
center going in each cardinal direction and were used to estimate
tick-host abundance. Tick abundance sampling locations were placed 8-10
m from the plot center in the NW, NE, SE, and SW areas. The center of
each plot was marked with a flag and GPS coordinates were recorded using
a Garmin Oregon 650t GPS unit (Olathe, KS).

![Figure 2. Field plot design](media/image4.png){width="6.5in"
height="6.5in"}

Figure 2. Field plot design

### Tree and shrub data collection

Within the 12.6 m radius plot we recorded the DBH of all trees ≥ 3 cm
DBH to the nearest 0.1 cm, and the distance (nearest 0.1 m) and azimuth
(compass degrees) from the plot center to the center of each tree. Each
tree was assigned a health category (Table 1) and relative canopy
position (Table 2). We recorded the heights of at least 10 trees in the
plot (or all trees if fewer than 10) that were representative of each
identified canopy position. In the 5.64 m radius subplot we recorded the
abundance of woody species (shrubs and tree seedlings/saplings) that
were \< 3 cm DBH and ≥ 100 cm tall. We also estimated overstory canopy
cover for the plot by taking measurements using a spherical convex
densiometer (Forestry Suppliers, Jackson, MS) while standing at each 1 m
quadrat and facing plot center.

**Table 1.** Tree health categories.

  Health code   Definition
  ------------- -----------------------------------------------------------
  0             dead, nothing living
  1             healthy
  2             relatively healthy
  3             unhealthy, barely alive stem
  4             all stems are dead, but has living sprouts not making DBH
  5             missing tree, the tree can't be found during resampling

**Table 2.** Tree canopy positions.

  Canopy code   Definition
  ------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  U             Understory, growing beneath the forest canopy, no direct sunlight
  I             Intermediate, extend toward the over-story canopy but receive little or no direct sunlight from above and none from the sides
  C             Co-dominant, receive direct sunlight from above but limited sunlight from the sides
  D             Dominant, extend high into the canopy, sticking out above most other trees, and receive direct sunlight from above and partly on its sides
  E             Emergent, crown extends well above all surrounding trees (typically mature redwoods or possibly douglas-fir)
  S             Stump, tree no longer has any stems (dead or alive) that make the DBH cutoff, if it does it's a snag or dead standing stem. If stump present, but also has any stems ≥3cm dbh it is NOT a "stump." Assign canopy class of tallest stem even if it does not make DBH

### Ground cover and litter data collection

We identified plant species and measured vegetation and litter
conditions in each of the four 1 m quadrats. We recorded the percent
cover of each plant species, total plant cover, litter cover, and bare
ground, and counted the number of stems of each species rooted within
the quadrat. Percent cover was visually estimated and estimates were
calibrated among observers to ensure consistency. We measured the three
tallest heights of woody species and the three tallest heights of
non-woody species rooted within each quadrat. Heights were measured from
the mineral soil surface. We also made three measurements of litter
depth in each quadrat from the top of the litter level to the mineral
soil surface. The 25 cm quadrats were placed adjacent to each 1 m
quadrat in an area representative of the conditions in the larger
qudrat, and we collected vegetation and litter in order to estimate
biomass. We collected all above-ground fine vegetation and litter within
the 25 cm quadrat into separate bags. Samples were weighed at the end of
the day to estimate fresh weights, then were returned to the BARS at UF,
placed in a 60ºC drying oven for at least 72 hours, and then weighed to
obtain dry weights. The difference between fresh weight and dry weight
was used to estimate moisture content.

![Figure 3. Sampling 1 m and 25 cm
quadrats](media/image5.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

Figure 3. Sampling 1 m and 25 cm quadrats

### Tick sampling

We primarily collected ticks using CO~2~ traps placed in each plot for
24 hours. Tick traps were constructed by mounting 5-quart hard-sided
coolers (Igloo, Katy, TX) onto the center of 0.635 cm (0.25 inch) thick
plywood pieces cut to 35 cm x 28 cm. There was approximately 7.6 cm
between the edge of the plywood and all sides of the cooler. Two 0.48 cm
(3/16 inch) holes were drilled through each side of the cooler just
above the bottom of the interior. Strips of double-sided carpet tape (DF
545, ShurTape, Hickory, NC) measuring 4.77 cm (1.88 in) wide were
attached to the plywood surface surrounding the cooler. Each trap was
baited with 1.5 kg of dry ice, which sublimated out through the holes
drilled in the coolers. A rain cover made from corrugated plastic
roofing cut to cover the entire footprint of the trap was attached to
the top of each cooler by drilling a 0.48 cm hole through the center of
the cooler lid and securing the roofing using a bolt and a wing-nut.

![Figure 4. Tick trap](media/image6.jpeg){width="6.5in"
height="4.875in"}

Figure 4. Tick trap

To ensure that the ticks attracted by the traps but not stuck to the
tape, were collected we dragged a 1 m x 1 m white canvas cloth across
the area directly below each trap three times. Ticks were also collected
off of personnel and were assigned a plot, burn unit, or installation
depending on the confidence in where the encounter occurred. Ticks
collected on traps were counted and removed from the tape using
tweezers, placed in 2 mL vials (Corning 430659) with 70% ethanol, and
transported to the Flory Lab at the University of Florida where they
were identified, sorted, and counted by species, life stage, and sex.
Sorted ticks were then shipped to the Allan Lab at the University of
Illinois where they underwent a second round of identification and
sorting, and were subsampled for pathogen analysis.

### Estimating host density

We conducted host-dung surveys along each 50 m transect to estimate
abundance of tick hosts near the plot area. Observed dung clusters of
host species (e.g. white-tailed deer, *Odocoileus virginianus*) were
tallied within 0 to 1 m of the transect line, totaling 400 m^2^ of
surveyed area. Species were identified by dung characteristics.

![Figure X. Dung transect](media/image7.png){width="6.5in"
height="8.653665791776028in"}

Figure X. Dung transect

##### Page Break

Results and Discussion
======================

Installation and plot visits
----------------------------

We established 94 total plots at 9 DoD installations across the
southeast US. Of the 94 only 10 were invaded (Figure 5a). Fire history
varied across the plots, ranging from 0 to 11 since the last fire
(Figure 5b). The small number of cogongrass-invaded plots was due to a
high level of awareness and recognition of cogongrass as a problematic
species, and diligent management practices that quickly eradicate
identified invasions.

![](media/image8.png){width="6.5in" height="6.5in"}

**Figure 5.** Number of plots established. (a) Number of plots
established at each of the DoD installations. (b) Number of plots
established in each time since fire. The color shading indicates whether
or not plots were in a cogongrass invasion - light blue is uninvadeda nd
red is invaded.

Trees and shrubs
----------------

We recorded 38 tree and shrub species. The vast majority of the 3633
trees recorded were in either the *Pinus* (pine) or *Quercus* (oak)
genus, with pine smaking up more than 50% of all trees recorded (Figure
6). Overall, tree diversity, quantified as species richness (the number
of species), tended to be greater in uninvaded plots, and, regardless of
invasion, higher with longer time since fire (Figure 7). Shrub and
sapling density (stems over one meter tall but less than 3 cm DBH)
measured in the center subplot ranged widely, but most plots had fewer
than 40 stems per 100 m^2^ (Figure 8).

![Figure XX. Stem map example](media/image9.png){width="6.5in"
height="8.411763998250219in"}

Figure XX. Stem map example

![](media/image10.png){width="6.5in" height="6.5in"}

**Figure 6.** Number of trees recorded at each installation. The
majority of trees belonged to the *Pinus* or *Quercus* genus.

![](media/image11.png){width="6.5in" height="6.5in"}

**Figure 7.** Tree diversity versus time since fire in invaded and
uninvaded plots. Points are jittered horizontally to reduce overlap.

![](media/image12.png){width="6.5in" height="6.5in"}

**Figure 8.** Shrub and sapling density. Points are jittered
horizontally to reduce overlap.

Understory herbaceous cover and species
---------------------------------------

Percent cover of understory herbaceous vegetation measured at the 1 m^2^
quadrats tended to be lower with longer time since fire in the uninvaded
plots, and higher with longer time since fire in the handful of
cogongrass-invaded plots (Figure 9). The biomass of standing understory
vegetation showed the same pattern as percent cover, but also ranged
widely from 6 to over 1600 g m^-2^ (Figure 10).

![](media/image13.png){width="6.5in" height="6.5in"}

**Figure 9.** Understory herbaceous vegetation. (a) Percent cover versus
time since fire and (b) dried mass versus time since fire. The light
blue points and line are univaded plots and red points and line are
invaded plots.

Cogongrass-invaded plots didn't have significantly different herbaceous
understory diversity (Figure 11a), which is likely in part due to the
relatively small sizes of invasions that we encountered. Most invasions
did not cover the entire plot area, often resulting in two or three of
the 1 m^2^ quadrats located in a area with little cogongrass cover. The
variation in species richness decreased with increasing time since fire,
changing most dramatically from three to four years since fire (Figure
11b).

![](media/image14.png){width="6.5in" height="6.5in"}

**Figure 10.** Understory species diversity. (a) Species richness versus
time since fire. (b) Box-plots of species richness illustrating that
plots burned further in the past have lower variation in species
richness. Open circles are the data points.

iNaturalist project
-------------------

We started an [iNaturalist
project](https://www.inaturalist.org/projects/serdp-species) to develop
a publicly available record of plant species we identified at DoD
installations as part of this project. iNaturalist is a digital platform
available via iOS, Android, and a website where professional and casual
scientists and naturalists from around the world can upload observations
of plants, animals, and fungi, and offer or seek help in species
identification. An observation is tagged as "Research Grade" when
identification has been supported by at least two members of the
community, the observation was in the wild, and it includes a relatively
accurate location and date. Research grade observations can be used for
research and included in other websites, such as the Global Biodiversity
Information Facility [GBIF](https://www.gbif.org/). During our field
surveys, we identified over 270 species and currently 50% of these have
been designated research grade. In the cases of rare species, such as
pitcher plants, we either excluded coordinates or included coordinates
that were imprecise (fuzzed approximately 1500 m) using functionality
built into iNaturalist.

![iNaturalist SERDP project](media/image15.png){width="6.5in"
height="5.204744094488189in"}

iNaturalist SERDP project

Litter cover, mass, and moisture content
----------------------------------------

Measurements of litter mass, percent cover, and moisture tended to
increase with time since last fire, while only percent cover showed a
significant difference in cogongrass-invaded versus uninvaded plots
(Figure 11). Litter biomass tended to be a little higher in uninvaded
plots, though not significantly (Figure 11a). Percent litter cover
rapidly recovered following fires, reaching \>50% within two years after
fire for most uninvaded plots (Figure 11b). Litter moisture is depends
on the prevailing weather conditions, so these results must be
interpreted within the context of our sampling time in the southeastern
U.S. (June - October). Litter moisture was predominantly \<50% across
all samples (Figure 11c).

![](media/image16.png){width="6.5in" height="6.5in"}

**Figure 11.** Litter conditions versus time since fire for (a) percent
cover, (b) dry mass, and (c) percent moisture. The light blue color is
for uninvaded plots and red is for cogongrass-invaded plots.

Host abundances
---------------

We identified eight tick host species during dung surveys across all
installations. White-tailed deer and eastern cottontail rabbit were
typically the most abundant host species at each installation (Figure
12). At Avon Park AFR, cow dung made up a substantial amount of dung
encountered due to domestic cattle grazing leases, illustrating the
mutli-use character of this installation. Wild turkey (*Meleagris
gallopavo*) made notable contribution to host density at Camp Blanding
and Eglin AFB during 2018 surveys. Total host densities did not
significantly differ between cogongrass-invaded and uninvaded areas, nor
with time since last fire (Figure 13).

![](media/image17.png){width="6.5in" height="6.5in"}

**Figure 12.** Evidence of host species densities at each installation
(dung clusters 400 m^-2^). Note that the y-axis has different scales in
each panel. Zeroes (no bars) are installations that weren't visited
during that year.

![](media/image18.png){width="6.5in" height="6.5in"}

**Figure 13.** Host densities vs. time since fire in cogongrass-invaded
and uninvaded plots. Blue indicates uninvaded plots and read indicates
cogongrass-invaded plots.

Tick abundances
---------------

We collected four different tick species across all installations
(Figure 14). The majority of ticks collected were in the nymph life
stage during both sample seasons (Figure 15a) and belonged to the target
species, *Amblyomma americanum* (Figure 15b). The small number of
invaded areas had few ticks (Figure 15). The majority of ticks collected
in 2017 were from Camp Blanding, FL and Eglin AFB, FL, while in 2018
most ticks collected were from Camp Blanding, FL, Fort Gordon, GA, and
Tyndall AFB, FL (Figure 16). Tick abundances tended to increase with
time since fire (Figure 17), indicating that tick abundance is reduced
by prescribed fire management across these installations.

![](media/image19.png){width="4.2208125546806645in"
height="7.839185258092739in"}

**Figure 14.** The four commonly collected tick species. (a) *Amblyomma
americanum* (Lone star tick), (b) De. var: *Dermacentor variablis*
(American dog tick), (c) Am. mac: *Amblyomma maculatum*, (d) Rh. san:
*Rhipicephalus sanguineus* (brown dog tick).

![](media/image20.png){width="5.703702974628172in"
height="5.703702974628172in"}

**Figure 15.** Tick abundances grouped by (a) life stage and (b) species
in each sample year. Am. am: *Amblyomma americanum*, Am. mac: *Amblyomma
maculatum*, De. var: *Dermacentor variablis*, Rh. san: *Rhipicephalus
sanguineus*. Blue indicates uninvaded and red indicates
cogongrass-invaded.

![](media/image21.png){width="6.5in" height="6.5in"}

**Figure 16.** Tick abundances at each installation for each sample
year. Blue indicates uninvaded and red indicates cogongrass-invaded.

![](media/image22.png){width="4.314815179352581in"
height="4.314815179352581in"}

**Figure 17.** Natural-log transformed tick abundance and time since
fire for cogongrass-invaded and uninvaded plots.
